what you have to express to people in no
uncertain terms is
there is a 100 percent
chance that your child will be born
with an intellectual disadvantage
that you are producing children
below their genetic potential
through inbreeding
the internet is crowded with
compelling excuses for bad behavior
there are so many excuses for you to do
self-indulgent things so many
voices that tell you to think of
yourself
and think of the short term only and not
to think
of the long term consequences for your
children
for your grandchildren for society as a
whole
not even to think about the long-term
consequences
for yourself this habit of mind
that offers excuses for smoking
marijuana
drinking alcohol eating red meat
it's even more intense when we come to a
question like
first cousin marriage or in plain
english
inbreeding it's more intense because our
own
egos are more directly involved
on the left hand side of the screen what
you see here is a man who discovered
that his own dna is the product
of inbreeding he is himself the product
of cousin marriage again and again
and again throughout the generations in
his family tree
and what does he uh what does he google
around for
at the very bottom on the left-hand side
you'll see oh he looked up a website
called
www.cousincouples.com
oh he didn't look up this uh
peer-reviewed medical
research article that states as an
established
fact that marrying your first
cousin reduces the intelligence
of your offspring no for some reason he
wasn't
interested in reading scientific
articles of this kind no
he turns to the internet and he finds
something
that's going to confirm his own high
opinion of himself oh and just look at
it what a great website
has a photograph there of albert
einstein
who married his cousin boy albert
einstein sure was a smart guy
he couldn't couldn't be wrong couldn't
be wrong about marrying your first
cousin
just looking at this picture doesn't
merely convince me that i would
never marry any of my own cousins but
also that i would not be interested in
marrying
any of albert einstein's cousins
in any case on the hand side of the
screen you see this man puts some
labor into charting out his own family
tree
he says at the third generation two of
my great-grandmother's grandparents were
siblings
susanna mariette was a first cousin only
anna barbara hertl was related through
marriage so he's saying
there's this one woman who was only
related to marriage who wasn't a cousin
of the other people on this chart the
fourth generation was more of the same
four of the eight were boutiliers who
had had the same last name in the fifth
generation
three of the eight marriages were
children from the same
couple it took me by surprise
initially i was stunned yes this is
someone who grew up
in an american culture where marrying
your own cousin was
taboo in some states legal
in some states illegal and he was
surprised to find that his ancestors
in canada had lived in a culture in a
country
where this kind of inbreeding wasn't
illegal at all it was much
more common than any canadian today
wants to admit to themselves
in bradford at the akhtar family home
life is unbearably difficult
[Music]
mauson feels constantly frustrated
his two sisters henna and zeleb are
unable to look after themselves
and their sight and hearing is getting
worse
their parents find it hard to come to
terms with the idea
that as first cousins they pass down a
gene that caused their children's
terrible disabilities what have the
doctors actually told you about this
you told you that it's it could be
anything to do with the fact that you
two are first cousins
yes they told this is a genetic disease
but i don't think this
is right but they told us my other my
other brother
he got to marry with her sisters
he got five children all of them
perfectly right there's no disability
with them
some families call it fate however
doctors are in no doubt about the cause
while an average children's hospital
will see 20 to 30 different recessive
genetic disorders over a decade
in bradford one children's hospital
alone has seen 165.
usmart helps out in his mum's school and
babywear shop
when he's not at college he works on the
shop floor deals with customers
and mans the till
i'm very protective of arizona he's like
more like
a i would say a 14 year old than an 18
year old
mentally you know it comes with me um
you know he's on holiday he comes with
with me to work yeah
so can keep an eye on him and things
despite what azmat's mom has been told
about the cause of his illness
she struggles to accept it i don't think
there's anything wrong in
fiscals and marriages because it's our
culture
and it's the norm really
the thing is though it's not guaranteed
it's going to happen or it's not high
risk it's one in four but
it could be like if it's one in four
it's like
three could be okay yeah
just think it was one of those things
because
my daughter she's fine this is the part
of the equation
nobody wants to deal with nobody wants
to take
this grieving mother aside and say to
her
no your daughter is not
fine this isn't a matter as simple
as whether or not your child happens to
have
down syndrome it isn't a simple
binary question of whether or not your
child
inherited one particular
genetic disadvantage inbreeding
lowers human intelligence
indeed this hypothesis developed in the
first place because it was observed
amongst
farm animals human beings have so much
experience raising animals from one
generation to the next
and you can imagine in medieval times or
at least in pre-modern times
it would be quite a bit of work to take
your flock of sheep
some distance to meet with another flock
of sheep
so that you could get some fresh blood
into the herd
but people learned to experience
observing these animals closely not just
in their behavior but also in the terms
of their
physical abnormalities that would become
obvious when they were chopped up to be
made into meat or when there were higher
and higher rates of stillbirth so on and
so forth
humans learned that if they allowed
animals
to inbreed if they allowed animals to
marry their own
cousins for generation after generation
the quality of the animals physically
and
intellectually would degenerate
and yes this is the same simple
scary fact we're staring at now
who wants to tell this woman that oh you
know according to this 2008 study
there is a robust negative correlation
between iq and
con sanguinity cousins
marrying cousins makes human beings
stupider and no this is not a problem
confined to the predominantly muslim
parts of the world however if you read
the abstract in full
you'll notice that part of what
scientists struggle with
is the difficulty of compensating for
forms of social prejudice that creep
into the calculus if you're looking at
poverty-stricken parts of the united
states
where marrying your own cousin is
associated with being poorly educated
and just poor then that's going to
prejudice the outcomes whereas
as with this paper which is frankly a
locus classicus a much cited source from
if you study these questions of cousin
marriage within arab societies where it
is
accepted or even encouraged for a very
large percentage of the population
then you can look at you can measure
the effects of genetically diminished
intelligence
without having to compensate for those
other
sources of prejudice let's have a look
that's audience all right 156.
so it's about five two she's five five
two
the doctors need to see him once every
six months to monitor his health
this time the news isn't good can it get
better or does it take time
what they are yeah yeah i think it's
hard to know what we haven't managed to
completely explain
why you've had this trouble we wouldn't
claim at any way to have a complete
cure treatment for probiotic acidia by
night
they still haven't found a cure for it
no because it's a genetic disease in a
way affects every cell in the body
okay you're all right my dream is
leaving together i got
like a good job and like build something
get married lot of family on my own as
well
it was like if you mind your cousins yet
like you
can always work out because like if
you're marrying someone dick
like you could have a disease because
you don't you don't know what that would
have couldn't scott
is it's important safety have kids yet
you you don't you don't know if that
likes if that cousin's
like a disease or something that how
that kid could be born because
some can be born different kindness
i am married for last 25 years
successfully with my first cousin
and i've got five children and thanks to
allah subhanahu wa'ta'ala that they are
all
fine and well shafka has been married to
his first cousin shazia harnam for 35
years
his mom and dad farnam begum and ali
bahadur are also first cousins
shafka's eldest son imran has continued
the family tradition
and just married his first cousin in
pakistan that's three generations of
first cousin marriage
we haven't seen any negativity in it so
therefore we are all for it
although between four and ten percent of
the children of first cousins are at a
high risk of recessive disorders
people who support cousin marriages say
this means that 90 to 96 percent of the
time
the children will be healthy a few of
you in the audience will now be asking
don't these people realize that what
they're doing
is illegal no in fact
marrying your cousin is not illegal
in the united kingdom in england
scotland and wales in fact throughout
western europe they're almost proud
of the fact that it's legal to marry
your cousin
because this was part of the unique
historical
and cultural experience of the
protestant
reformation whereas medieval catholicism
was very strictly opposed to marrying
your cousins
even your second cousins and third
cousins
protestantism beginning with martin
luther
overturned this tradition perhaps in
part just because
martin luther was rather fond
of overturning and challenging the
authority of the catholic church
as such on the death of his elder
brother arthur
in 1491 henry viii had obtained people
dispensation to marry his brother's
widow
catherine of aragon as the marriage
failed to produce a male heir
henry petitioned the pope for a divorce
on the grounds that his marriage to
catherine
his sister-in-law was invalid under the
levitical statutes
so in 1533 henry established the church
of england
with himself as monarch of england the
head of the church
having embarked on this major religious
realignment and wishing to marry
catherine howard
a cousin of his executed second wife
anne boleyn in 1540
henry issued a statute that legalized
marriage
between all first
cousins this tradition
whether we think of it as proud or
shameful
remains strangely influential
in western europe and around the world
to this day with scientific research
showing that first cousins who marry are
doubling their chances of having
children with rare diseases
why is there so little awareness of this
in the wider british population
sonja and wayne gibbs invited me to
their family home
they've been together for 16 years wayne
is sonya's dad's cousin making them
first cousins
once removed something that never struck
them as a problem
their child nicole died of juvenile
osteopatrosis
a genetic disease that causes the bones
to thicken
and crush the body's organs they were
told
it was because they both carried
recessive genes
so as a parent to sort of go from having
what you thought was a perfectly healthy
normal baby how did that feel
upsetting horrible feel
absolutely helpless because you know
there's just not
a thing you can do did you decide to
have a third child was that poor well we
went through obviously genetic
counselling what they call it
because obviously we want to know you
know can we have
any more children but that test for you
was absolutely essential
it was vital there was no way we was
going to even
you know have another child if there was
no test out there
that could help and obviously i just
would have stuck it nathan that would
have been it
and now you've got two very healthy kids
two very healthy boys
[Music]
and now you've got two very healthy kids
two very healthy boys
[Music]
i've shared with you several short clips
from that documentary
many of you may have found it meaningful
moving or even hard-hitting you might
think
wow that's a documentary that is going
to strike a blow
against human indifference and motivate
people
to really get out and change their ways
i'm here to tell you now
the exact opposite that documentary
took the wrong approach at every stage
of the argument
and i can guarantee that people will
only
double down on their commitment to
justifying and excusing
first cousin marriage and why
because the documentary made the mistake
of expressing
the problem in terms of risk if you tell
these couples
they have a seven percent chance and
this is the number used in newspaper
headlines
sort of the soft science rounded off
factoid of the day
if you tell these people that they have
a seven percent chance
of having a child with a horrible
debilitating
deformity or disability they'll shrug
their shoulders and say
well there's still a 93 chance that the
child will be perfectly
fine
even within the documentary people say
that again and again again
and not merely when the odds are 93
versus seven
even when it's a one in four chance when
it's a
25 chance of a serious debilitating
disability
and then only a 75 percent chance of the
child being
quote unquote okay what you have to
express to people
in no uncertain terms is there is a 100
percent
chance that your child will be born
with an intellectual disadvantage
that you are producing children
below their genetic potential
through inbreeding people need to be
told in no
uncertain terms this isn't a risk
this isn't a roll of the dice it's a
certainty
and that entails for you a very
definite moral obligation to
never ever reproduce
with any of your cousins and that's
that's the state's argument always
that's why we have these laws because
the state has
a compelling interest to prevent genetic
defects in children and that is really
why we have these laws on the books
the internet exacerbates the innate
human capacity for short-term
self-indulgence and excuse making what
we need governments to do
what we need laws to do is motivate
people
to look beyond their own selfish
short-term pleasure and think about
what's best
not just for themselves but others not
just for themselves and not just for
their own children and grandchildren
but for society as a whole television
in the era of its dominance certainly
had this same tendency
to encourage people to live as infants
who never take on mature
responsibilities
i confess but on your tv remote
there were only so many channels you
could flip between
and each channel was just identified
with a number
the remote control for the internet lets
us
dial in precisely the excuses
that we want to hear even for something
as barbaric
even for something as destructive
as first cousin marriage
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice
yes